The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this program is robots and mechanical men. Along with aliens and
space travel, I think robots are one of the most stock of all science fiction
concepts. For some people, they're probably synonymous with science fiction. We
see robots throughout the entire history of science fiction. Sometimes they're a
danger to man, their creator, and sometimes a benevolent and faithful helper.
Today, we're exposed to them continually in the movies and on TV. And I think
that's because they can be so fascinatingly visual and noisy, with glowing red
eyes, squeaks, clicks, hums, whirs. And representation of media robots also make
good toys to sell to kids. But as a concept, in good science fiction literature,
they allow for some deep and insightful examinations of the human condition. One
author states that the value of robot stories is that in dealing with the man
-made version of humanity, the science fiction writer is lured into considering
the nature of man in its deepest aspects. Before we go into it any further, we
might stop and define what a robot is and perhaps differentiate a robot from
several other words that are used to describe non-human but humanoid creatures.
Right. I think, first of all, that a robot is obviously something created, a
mechanical artifact, made of artificial materials like metal, plastic, rubber,
wires, tubes, hydraulic fluids, whatever. It's mobile, self-contained, self
-propelled, whether it uses legs, wheels, treads, or some kind of anti-gravity
device. It may or may not look like a man, though it can think to some degree.
The basic differences between a robot and an android are the materials with
which they're built. An android is constructed of organic or living material. An
android can be human in form. In fact, it can be human in form in every possible
manner. Another word and category that we might also touch on is cyborg. A
cyborg is not the same as either a robot or android. A cyborg is like what the
six million dollar man was, a combination of machine with a man's mind. This can
be either minimal, like a mechanical hand in some senses. People with prosthetic
devices could almost be called a cyborg. Or it can go on to the extremes of an
entire body made up of metal and plastics and things with a mind of a human
being. The idea of a man-like machine, an automaton or robot, as we mentioned
before, is one of the oldest of all science fiction themes, one of the classic
concepts. And it goes all the way back to Greek times. King Minos of Crete had a
bronze giant named Talos, made by the craftsman Daedalus, which Minos used to
guard and patrol the island. And later in the 16th century, Jewish legend
developed the figure of the golem. Though the golem was made of clay, he could
be brought to life and was a precursor of robots. Rossum's Universal Robots, or
otherwise known as RUR, a Czechoslovakian play by Karel Capek, is not the first
use of robots in literature, but is the first use of the word robot. The word is
derived from the word robota, meaning compulsory labor, and robotnik, meaning
workman. The play dealt with robots that discover emotion and ultimately rebel
against their masters. In the prelude to a collection of short stories by Isaac
Asimov, eight stories from the rest of the robots, he mentions another story
that seems to blend into this robot fabric that is being weaved into the modern
robot stories. He mentions the novel Frankenstein by Mary Shelley as indicative
of the kind of sociological background that became the robot in later stories.
Here we have the age-old dream of man to create another life form himself. But
this goes against all of his morals and almost all of the religions who say that
God is the only one who can create a life form. And so then when mankind does
create this life form, it turns on him and eventually destroys both itself and
the people who created it. This, of course, is the idea behind Frankenstein.
What Isaac Asimov decided to do was to take all of the robot stories that he had
read, which were all Frankenstein complex stories, and try something different.
Write one where the robots would not be necessarily evil. Yeah, it's
interesting, that book Frankenstein, I think a lot of people identify that as
the first science fiction novel that was published back in the early 19th
century. But I would say probably the first modern robot story was published in
1938 by Lester Del Rey entitled "Helen O'Loy". Now, the early robots, I think most
of them were sort of mindless machines. Sometimes like Frankenstein, they got
out of control and they often became a menace. But the story "Helen O'Loy" changed
that. She was a beautiful humanoid robot that was built by two inventors. And
when they were constructing her, they accidentally gave her the emotion of love.
And so, logically, she fell in love with one of her creators. She marries him
and they live a happy life together until he dies. And then she destroys herself
because she had loved him so much. It's a very sentimental story, but it's
probably can be identified as the first one where the robot is a sensitive
creature, not simply a mindless automaton out to destroy humanity or turn on its
creators. Jack Williamson has done a lot of work in this area too with robots,
humanoids, androids, and so forth. And he has one of the classics entitled With
Folded Hands. And that would have to be characterized as a dystopian robot
story, the kind where the machine doesn't actually turn on its creator, but it
does something that is going to be very harmful to the human race. One of the
cornerstones that the robots in the novel operate on, or in fact the
cornerstone, is they are to guard men from harm. And in guarding men from harm,
they deny man from any sort of creative, most intellectual, and most pleasurable
pursuits that a man would have. Yeah, they won't let people drive cars, for
instance, because there's a possibility of a wreck. They won't let them play
certain games or sports because they could get hurt. Almost any activity that we
consider to be normal is denied by the robots, and they're there to enforce it
so that people symbolically have to sit there with folded hands. They can't do
anything. Yeah, there is no recourse against the robots. Man has created, in
this case, a being that succeeds too well. So there's sort of an irony to it,
right? Man has created the perfect machine, one that can do everything for him.
And it does so much for him that there's a danger that man is going to become
extinct, almost. Also, there's an interesting group of stories, I think, that
are robot cultures, or cultures of robots, or societies are formed. And they
outlive humanity. Many authors who see that the human race is causing itself a
great deal of trouble, say, with weapons, with nuclear warheads, with using up
the environment, will conceive of robots as outliving man. That man has created
the robots, he becomes extinct, and the robots take over. A few of those stories
can be seen in Clifford Simak's collection, City, where man really have blasted
themselves out of existence, and the robots they create are there to carry on
civilization. John W. Campbell has a couple stories published in the early 30s,
"Twilight" and "Night", where millions of years in the future, human beings have
degenerated. Their machines have become so powerful and so all-encompassing that
man no longer has the capacity to be a man. It's almost an extension of
Williamson's with folded hands. And so man have degenerated into mindless
beings, and the robots run the world. And one other that should be mentioned, I
think, is Brian Aldiss's classic story, But Who Can Replace a Man, in 1958? And
the interesting part of that story is that the whole thing is written from the
robot's point of view. Almost all men are gone, and the robots are wondering,
what do we do now? How can we carry on without them? And you see them working to
form a viable society now that man is gone. The same theme is taken by other
authors in a humorous tone. For instance, Cyberiad by Stanislaw Lem. It's one of
those inimitable works by him that's purely a good time to read. The entire
piece is a social satire, the tradition of Swift, but it's in the style of
science fantasy. The characters are all robots of a high degree of complexity.
In fact, these are the robots that men created eons ago who have now taken their
own initiative as man declined. These robots have evolved on their own into a
legitimate life form, and have advanced so far that they don't even remember
their origin in mankind. One particularly funny passage is the recitation by one
of the characters, a robot of course, of the theory of evolution a la robotics,
which begins with atom striking atom in the formless darkness to create current,
which gave rise to proto-mechanoans and so forth, not even omitting the missing
clink. The digs that we pale faces, as the robots refer to humans, are all in
good humor, and the robots themselves are all original and hilariously
civilized. Another robot novel in the humorous vein is Robots Have No Tails by
Henry Kuttner. Gallegher, the protagonist in the book, has a rather unusual of
creative abilities, but only when he's completely drunk. This presents him with
a myriad of problems when he sobers up because he has to figure out what he
invented and why. One of his inventions in the novel Robots Have No Tails is a
robot that will not respond to any of his commands. All the robot will do is sit
and admire himself in a mirror. Gallegher tricks the robot into hypnotizing
itself in order to greater admire its beauty, then asks it, Why did I create
you? The robot reaches over and picks up a beer can and opens it without
spilling a drop and hands it to Gallegher. The robot, as it turns out, is the
world's most sophisticated beer can opener. When a man's an empty kettle, he
should be on his metal, and yet I'm torn apart. Just because I'm presuming that
I could be kind of human if I only had a heart. But of course, whenever the
subject of robots comes up, there's only one name that you need to come down to
to cover the field, and that's Isaac Asimov. The name is familiar to all science
fiction readers because Asimov is one of the most prolific writers of all time.
He's written over 220 books, and he's still going strong. He's one of the few
science fiction authors who is also a scientist with a Ph.D. in biochemistry.
His first science fiction story was published in 1939 for John W. Campbell. And
though he's written on almost all science fiction themes, such as time travel,
galactic empires, space exploration, and so forth, he is certainly best known
for his robot stories. In fact, Asimov defined and molded the robot story in
such books as I, Robot, The Caves of Steel, The Naked Sun, and the rest of the
robots. As we mentioned earlier, Asimov's main purpose in dealing with robots
was to create robots that were not necessarily evil. And he got around the
automatic destructive qualities of robots by creating three laws that were built
in to every robot that humankind created. Law number one, a robot may not injure
a human being or through inaction allow a human being to come to harm. Law
number two, a robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where
such orders would conflict with the first law. Law number three, a robot must
protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the
first or second law. Asimov invented what he called a positronic brain for these
robots. It was made of platinum iridium, a sponge made of those elements. And
the brain paths were marked out by the production and destruction of positrons,
hence the term positronic brain. And ingrained in this brain are the three laws
of robotics, which a robot has to obey because it's part of his psyche. The
first novel that Asimov wrote concerning the robot culture that he invented in
I, Robot, was the novel Caves of Steel, written in 1953. Here we have a society
of earthmen who have gone beyond the huge cities of today. They've taken this to
the extreme. They've enclosed the cities in domes. Everyone lives within the
realm of the cities. The outside lands are for farming and are run by, mostly by
robots. The people have gotten so used to this kind of life that they don't
even, they can't face the outdoors. They wouldn't know what to do with an open
sky and wind in their face. These huge cities are indeed Caves of Steel, and
that's where the title of the novel comes from. Earth has an overpopulation
problem at this time. I think the major cities on earth, or all of them, have
about millions of people in them. And earth has 8, 9 billion people on it. Their
protein level is, it's difficult to keep it up. They have to subsist on yeast,
and yeast becomes the basics of all their diet. And they've evolved really a
very insular culture. As you said, they're afraid of the outside world. They
have many fears, in fact, and they seem to have comfort only in their cities
where they can huddle like animals in a cave or something of that sort. At one
time in the past, they colonized other planets, but the colonists eventually
overthrew them, and are forcing the earth people to stay on earth. I think the
earth people kind of want to stay there because by this time they're afraid,
too, almost of leaving their cities. They do have connections with the colonists
who are now called spacers, and the spacers are their trading connection with
other planets. Yeah, the spacers are almost totally opposite of the remaining
earthmen in that they live in open spaces, they hate the indoors, they're
extremely careful about contacting the earthmen because they have eliminated
almost all the diseases, earth-borne diseases, and they're very fastidious, and
when they meet a real earthman, they are extremely careful in doing so. The
earthman tends to take that as... An insult. An insult, being superior to the
earthman, but in reality, though the spacer allows that to happen because he
wants to maintain an image of superiority, in reality the spacer is afraid of
the earthman because the earthman can kill him with the germs that he carries.
And as the book begins, and we have sort of a conflict here, we have the
earthman and their cities, you know, very insular and very avoiding any kind of
contact with the spacers. But the spacers have one little enclave on earth to
keep their contact open. And there's some sort of plot going underneath the
surface. The spacers want earth to open up. They think that the only way the
human race is going to progress and go forth is for both branches to reunite.
Now we don't know this at the beginning, but that's the basic setup that Asimov
has put into the novel. And of course into that he's injected the attitude
toward robots of the respective branches of earthman. The people on earth use
robots, but they use them disparagingly. They don't like robots, even though
they do use them. That's the old Frankenstein complex that Asimov talked about,
where they're afraid they're going to lose their jobs to robots. They think
they're being demeaned by them. And the protagonist of the book, Lije Bailey,
seems to hate robots. He'll curse at them. He'll try to avoid them. He'll get
mad when they talk to him. And that seems to be the attitude of many earthmen.
There have been riots, in fact, where they have trapped a robot and just torn it
apart completely. The robots represent the spacers to the earthmen, and they
react against the robots because they can't react against the spacemen. And the
spacers have got better robots. They appreciate robots. They're not afraid of
them. And they've developed some very high-class models. In fact, the conflict
of the story involves the contact and the forcing of the protagonist, Lije
Bailey, to work with one of these extremely advanced robots. This robot is so
advanced that he looks human and can be mistaken for a human by even experts in
robotics. Yeah, Bailey and the robot are both policemen. There's been a murder
in Spacetown, the spacer enclave on Earth, and the spacers think it's an
earthman who's done it. And so they send their robot policeman to work with the
earth policeman, Lije Bailey, to see if they can figure out who's done it and
avoid a conflict between the spacers and the earthmen. And so the book becomes a
detective story. It's one of the few science fiction detective stories that has
been written. John W. Campbell one time said, nobody could write a science
fiction detective story. And Asimov, in retaliation to that, wrote Caves of
Steel, which is a science fiction detective story. Of course, others have been
written since then. For instance, The Long Arm of Gil Hamilton with Larry
Niven's works. I think one interesting part about Caves of Steel is the way that
Lije Bailey little by little overcomes his original hatred and fear and loathing
even of this robot, this R. Daneel Olivaw, with the R standing for robot. In fact,
he's very put out at first because he doesn't know that Olivaw is a robot. But as
they progress, as they work together, Lije comes to respect him. And they solve
the case, both of them working together when it looks like they might not. But
at the last minute, they do. And Lije comes to understand what Asimov, I think,
wants people to understand, that robots can be beneficial and all they are is
machines, that they're not to be feared. Daneel not only works with Lije Bailey,
but he also ends up living with him because of the restricted quarters on Earth.
And that leads to several conflicts in Bailey's own personal life. But both
Bailey and his wife eventually learn to appreciate the robot because he has many
admirable qualities about him. I think we could probably say the overall theme
of the book is not so much the robot himself or the use of robots, but the
optimistic notion that mankind has to expand. He has to keep expanding. Earth,
long ago before the novel started, had colonized part of the solar system. They
had retreated because they were then repulsed by their original colonists. And
now they're insular. They won't leave the Earth. They're afraid. They're afraid
even of the open air. The spacers realize that something has to be done. Earth
has to open up again. And I would say the overall theme of the book, therefore,
becomes the avoidance of stagnation, and the solving of overpopulation and food
problems by opening up the Earth and allowing Earthmen to colonize again in
large numbers. And Asimov carries that further in the book which followed Caves
of Steel, which was called The Naked Sun. In The Naked Sun, Lije Bailey and
Daneel are once again united on a spacer planet where a murder has taken place,
and they are asked to solve this murder. Here we get a first glimpse of the
spacer life, which is totally different from the life on Earth. Here there are
20,000 people on this planet, and that's all. They live each one in a house by
themselves with a great amount of land surrounding them, the land devoted to
agriculture. And each one of these people has lived this way all his life and
for generations so long that they abhor contact with each other as much as the
Earth people abhor insulation from others. Even when people are married and live
in the same house together, they live in separate wings of the house. They don't
stay together, they don't eat together, they don't really interact together
within a great degree at all. The communication and interaction that they do
indulge in occurs through the use of a very sophisticated holographic setup
where one room can be joined, as it were, to another room by means of
audiovisual link. Two people would seem to be in the same room together, but in
actuality maybe half the planet apart. Lije's got a couple basic problems in
this novel. In the first place, he's still a detective. He has to solve a
murder, another murder. Secondly, he has a severe personal problem in that he's
out of Earth, he's out of his caves of steel for the first time, and the open
space is terrifying. You know, the first time, he's not only outside of the
caves of steel, he's left the planet, and he's got to solve his murder under
this, overcoming the whole, his whole training, his whole upbringing, which has
been to avoid the outside world. And yet, Lije has been one of the very few
people who's begun to see the point that humans should begin to learn to get
back to the open spaces and work with the robots. And he makes an attempt, a
very brave attempt for him to experience the outside. And he's thinking that
this is the one time that a human may get this chance. The spacers don't want to
let him do that. And it becomes a very strange conflict within Lije himself that
he's fighting not only himself, but the spacers, and also that urge to find out
what the open spaces and the spacer planets are really like. But I think by the
end of the book, we believe that not only does he solve the murder, we know
that, but we also believe that the theme that we saw beginning in Caves of Steel
is going to come about, that Earth will open up, that Earth people who live in
these Caves of Steel are going to realize that they can't do that forever, they
have to get out. And we somehow suspect that the two branches of the human race,
the spacers and the earthmen, are going to blend and they will explore and
colonize further with the help of robots.
through the 40s and 50s and 60s and 70s, Asimov wrote robot stories for science
fiction magazines. That's amazing. Over four decades, he continued with the same
themes, the same ideas. Mostly he'd center on an American company entitled U.S.
Robotics, United States Robotics. And characters recurred in the stories,
particularly Susan Calvin, who was a robo-psychologist, a term invented by
Asimov. And basically the stories would center on the problems, the
developments, the progress and so forth involved with robots and overcoming
people's fear of them. Overall, I think, we see that he's not only writing about
robots, but he's examining humanity, Asimov is. As we noted earlier, a robot
story, in a sense, reflects on human nature. It gives man something to measure
himself against. And one of his latest stories, and I think probably one of his
most profound, Asimov works at defining what is a human being by using robots.
That story is "Thou Art Mindful of Him". And in that story, the head of U.S.
Robotics has come up with a problem. His company is going into default if he
cannot come up with a new product with which to sustain his company. So he takes
his top flight robot, George Ten, and asks him, how can they come up with
something to sustain the company? And George Ten asks for some help from George
9, and they go into a room and start thinking. And eventually, what they come up
with is not what the head of U.S. Robotics is after. What they come up with is a
way of getting around the three laws, in that George 9 believes that George Ten
is such a high caliber of being that he thinks of him as being human. And if
George Ten is thought of as being human, then robots are now human and can get
around the three laws. Right. If it comes down to a choice of whether they
should obey one of themselves, a robot or a human being, they can pick
themselves. Since between themselves, George Nine and Ten have worked out that they
are more than human beings. So when it comes to a judgment call, they can go
with the robots rather than the humans. So they've gotten around the three laws.
In the Fritz Lang film Metropolis in 1926, there was the first use of a humanoid
type robot used in the cinema. The robot is eventually changed to where its
appearance is totally of that of one of the major characters in the movie, a
young girl. And then the robot in the guise of the young girl is used to incite
a riot on the planet. which eventually leads to a partial takeover of the city.
This is really a very good demonstration of the Frankenstein complex used in
literature up until that time transposed to the cinema. In 1951, one of the
classic science fiction films by Robert Wise is The Day the Earth Stood Still.
And that movie contains one of the first identifiable robots in the cinema.
These two aliens arrive on Earth. with one, an alien, a biological creature, and
one, a robot named Gort. And Gort has gone down in the cinema as one of the, one
of the classic robots and probably the first one that people could, could name
and remember. The movie was taken from a short story called "Farewell to the
Master" by Harry Bates. In the movie, Gort is a standard robot taking
instructions from the lead character Klaatu played by Michael Rennie. But in the
book, they have sort of a switch on a theme. The robot is the master and the
human alien with him is really the subject. When the human half of the alien
team is killed, they go to the robot and they say, well, we're sorry that your
master has been killed. And the robot turns to them and says, well, he wasn't
the master. I am the master. But these were not brought out in the film. There
are some important themes in that movie, but one of them, I think, is a comment
on humanity. The Klaatu and Gort come as peaceful creatures to contact and to
establish relations. The humans start shooting and ultimately Gort responds by,
with violently. But I'm not sure we can blame him. I think perhaps the movie
maker meant us to see Gort in some sympathetic light. His master's been killed.
He's responding violently. But it's certainly not the Frankenstein complex
operating. Once Klaatu is killed, Gort automatically goes on a destructive
rampage until he is stopped with a certain set of commands which Klaatu has
given to one of his friends on Earth. And then Gort goes and finds Klaatu and
brings him back to the spacecraft and ultimately brings him back back to life.
And they give a farewell speech to the scientists gathered around the spacecraft
and then depart to the Earth. Another classic movie in which we can recognize a
popular robot is Forbidden Planet. In 1956 when this movie was released the
audiences were exposed to a new robot known as Robbie the Robot. Most people
still recognize Robbie the Robot. The actual prop they used, the robot, is still
in existence and is used in all sorts of things from commercials to appearances
and shopping centers and everything else. this is one of the more popular I
think of the robot characters that's been portrayed in cinema or in books. I
think a lot of people when they conceive of a robot when they get an image of
one they remember Robbie because they saw that movie. And it is one of the few
movies where a robot has a major part in the motion picture. He is one of the
main characters in the picture. For me Robbie is sort of a precursor or a
preview of the cute person little robots that we see in later movies like Star
Wars with his little beeps and clicks and so forth.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.
He's a hardware robot. He's nuts and bolts and light bulbs and flashing lights.
Well, so are the robots in Star Wars like C-3PO and R2-D2.
And we might touch on several other films and television shows that have
included robots in a major position in the end. You can cut it after robots. For
instance, Silent Running in 1972, Doug Trumbull's film, where we see the three
small robots that are in charge of the forest ships, Huey, Dewey, and Louie.
The,
oh yeah, the alien, oops, the robot that we see in the 1979 movie, Alien, is
also an interesting one, Ash, who appears to be a man, and all the people on
board the ship don't realize that he's a robot until he's destroyed and comes
apart and they can see the mechanism is an interesting one also.
Bopping the cable.
And I guess we should also mention Black Hole. This is an example, I think, of
the poor taste in presentation of robots. This is, like we've said in concerning
with, like we've said in reference to aliens, here they've just given us a human
in a funny suit. These are not really robots and not portrayed realistically,
they're just funny creatures in funny suits. I think they tried to build on Star
Wars there with cute little robots and they just overdid the cuteness. A movie,
a very recent movie entitled Saturn 3, which otherwise wasn't too impressive to
me at least, had a fairly interesting robot in it named Hector, which is what I
think a robot would look like. It was, the creature himself at least was well
done, even though the movie I don't think was a very successful one. We haven't
really talked about Star Wars. We mentioned it earlier, that's everybody knows
Star Wars. television has also had its
host of robots. One of the main characters in Lost in Space was a robot, Lost in
Space produced in the late 60s. We aren't really given any background on the
robot, we don't even know what its name is, it's only referred to as a robot. In
the British BBC series, Doctor Who, Doctor Who's, one of Doctor Who's main
nemesis, what's the plural of nemesis? Nemeses. In the BBC, in the BBC,
in the BBC series, Doctor Who, one of Doctor Who's main nemesis, sis, I forgot
it, nemeses. In the BBC series, Doctor Who, one of Doctor Who's, one of Doctor
Who's main nemesis, are the Daleks, which are a alien robot race, which, in
various unsundry times through the series, tries to come and take over the
Earth. And one of the latest versions of robots are the Cylons, used in
Battlestar Galactica. In there, they're the ultimate enemies of mankind, pure
hostility out to exterminate the human race. Segway, segway, segway, ending.
Another famous ending by D. Crews. Short and sweet.
Whether the robots of reality will correspond with those of fiction remains to
be seen. But science fiction authors will, we hope, continue to tantalize us
with stories of the mechanical men, the iron and steel and plastic men, who are
really a reflection of ourselves, as man attempts to create life in his own
image. Kill it, rewind it, let's go home.